Once around Aerys, the object in the
outer solar system that was discovered
and thought at one stage to be the
missing planet X. A erys is now
classified as a dwarf planet. It lies in
the outer solar system beyond Neptune, a
trans neptunian object as TNO.
And so far out beyond the Kiper belt
where Pluto lives, this is a member of
what we call the scattered disc, a group
of objects in somewhat scattered and
tilted orbits out beyond the relatively
flat part of the solar system.
First discovered in January 2005. And
you can see the image here with the big
orange arrow pointing at the little
moving dot moving across the sky. This
was found at the Paloma Observatory by
Mike Brown and colleagues and was part
of a deliberate search for these trans
neptunian objects and that was very
successful. It yielded a list of others
there. Maki, Maki, Huame, Qua, Orcus,
and indeed Sedna, even further out into
the dark reaches of the solar system.
But they had discovered that images of
this were in previous data sets, a
so-called pre-covery, and that dates
back quite some way, all the way back,
in fact, to images that were taken in
1954.
It's amazing how these things get imaged
but they don't get recognized.
Although it is moving very very slowly.
In fact, Mike Brown and colleagues had
to d-tune their filters in their
computer software that was looking for
movement so that they made it more
sensitive and weren't filtering out
objects that were moving this slowly. Um
otherwise they would not have caught it.
So originally designated 2003
UB313,
it was informally named Zena after the
warrior princess shown in the photograph
on the left there and actually carried
that name for quite some time. And Mike
Brown says that it's because of the
association with the search for planet
10, planet X, that they chose the X for
Zena for that nickname. But it was
officially named Eris in September 2006
after the goddess of strife and discord
imaged there on the right.
Now, as I said, it's out beyond the
Kiper belt, quite a long way from the
sun. In February of 2016, it was 96.3
AU astronomical units from the sun.
Neptune is at around about 30. So, this
was three times as far away as Neptune.
Um, and not quite that for Pluto, in
fact, because Pluto is a little further
away than Neptune is at the moment.
And this diagram of objects in the Trans
Neptunian region there shows dots for
the discoveries and circles for the
larger objects indicating their relative
sizes. And you can see that Eris is one
of the more extremely distant objects
and one of the largest there. Um, and
you can compare that against the size
shown for Pluto. We'll talk more about
their relative sizes in a moment, but I
just want to show you its orbit. And
when you look at it like this, you can
see that the orbit is quite elliptical.
Goes from 38 to 98 astronomical units.
So that's quite a long thin orbit by
comparison. Takes around 560
Earth years to do a complete lap. That's
uh well very long time indeed.
But that view that we have there belies
the fact that it's very tilted. I've
kept that view on the left but on the
right we're looking at it in a more
edge-on projection. And you can see that
it's tilted at 44 degrees to the plane
of the solar system, the main planets.
And that's trying to give that
impression. Pluto's is orbit is a little
tilted but nothing compared to that of
erys. It seems that once we get out
beyond the main kiper belt these high
tilts in the scattered disc are much
more normal uh for a lot of these
objects and that very high tilt means
that it does not stick to the ecliptic
path. The ecliptic path is the plane of
the solar system projected onto the sky.
And in the background, we've got a bit
of a star map. You can see the line of
the equator. That's the projection of
the Earth's equator onto the sky and of
the ecliptic running more diagonally.
That's the plane of the solar system.
The angle between those represents the
tilt of the Earth of 23° or thereabouts.
Um, you can also see Saturn, Jupiter,
and the moon marked on this map and they
are all close to that ecliptic line
because they move in essentially a flat
plane around the sun. Uh, but I've drawn
on the path that Eris has taken and will
be taking as it moves around the sky. So
it was in the southern hemisphere for
many years in the constellations of
Sculptor and then Phoenix
and soon it will move up from Setus
where it is now into Pisces crossing the
ecliptic
and then up through Aries and all the
way up through Perseus and into the
constellation of the giraffe
Camelopardus.
And that's in 2173
at which point the trajectory across the
sky will naturally turn and uh go back
round for another cycle. Um so it's
quite interesting. very much the case
that it was discovered quite away from
the ecliptic plane, showing that these
searches that concentrated on that
ecliptic plane were probably um looking
in the wrong place for a lot of objects
and that as we widen our searches, we
should find more of them.
Now, in terms of mass, it's actually the
most massive of the dwarf planets. It's
more massive than Pluto. 127% of Pluto's
mass. But that's still tiny. Just 0.28%
the mass of Earth.
That makes it the ninth most massive
object to be orbiting the sun that we
know about and the 16th most massive
object that we know of in the solar
system as a whole. And in the background
here we can see the planet Mars top left
followed by Ganymede, Titan, Mercury,
Kalisto, and then we have Eerys, Pluto,
Triton, Europa, the moon, and Io just to
give you some sort of scale. And then a
lot of the smaller moons down at the
bottom there. So quite a significant
object.
It's also quite big.
The size was pinned down when it very
conveniently passed across in front of
another star
and that was observed from multiple
locations in Chile and each location
gives you a very slightly different
perspective and so the star disappears
as the object moves in front and occults
it a so-called occultation event and
then as the object moves moves it will
eventually reveal the star again but
from the different observing sites the
intersection
line of the star is a different length
because it's crossing a different chord
across the disc of the object and so the
duration of the event is different. So
you can infer from that a number of
different chords and if you do that you
can get a pretty good idea of the
diameter. And so enough of those cords
were taken so that we now know that it's
2,326
km in diameter at its widest point.
And that makes it very slightly smaller
than Pluto, 50 km less.
Pluto was determined to be 2376
kilometers by the flyby of the New
Horizon's probe which got up close to it
was able to photograph it very
accurately and give us a really good
reading.
So it's still a record holder. It's the
largest known solar system object that
has not yet been explored.
Maybe we should fix that.
But was it a planet? Well, because when
it was originally observed, it appeared
to be larger than Pluto,
I say appeared to be, this was based on
estimates again from its brightness and
guessing how reflective it was.
Something that is very shiny will appear
brighter and therefore you might guess
that it was larger. If it's dark, then
you might find that it reflects less
light and is uh underestimated in terms
of size. And because Aerys is brighter
and whiter than Pluto, the original
estimates of its size put it as larger.
And so NASA described this as the 10th
planet in the solar system, Pluto being
planet number nine at that stage.
Well, that was a problem because as I
said in the beginning slide, Eris wasn't
the only thing to be discovered. A whole
range of other
transnunian objects came out of the same
search. Huame, Maki, Maki, and so forth,
Gorus, Sednner. Yeah. So, how many
planets were we going to have? We could
have very rapidly ended up with a dozen,
20, even a hundred planets in the solar
system. And this led to a big debate
about what really is constituting a
planet. It comes from the Greek
planettos which means wanderer and
originally that meant anything that was
seen to change its position during the
course of a year including the sun and
the moon. Those were classed as planets
along with the uh then known planets of
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn.
Of course, the discovery of Uranus and
Neptune added two more to that. But so
did the discovery of the asteroids. When
seriesir and Juno, Palace, and Vesta
were discovered, we had four extra
little planets in the solar system at
that stage uh back in the early 1800s.
And so the number of planets was
beginning to get out of control then.
They were later reclassified as
asteroids. Asteroid,
meaning starlike, because frustratingly,
even with the very good telescopes of
the time, you could not get them to
magnify up to show a disc. They were
just starlike, a single point of light.
And so, the name was coined. And it's a
very poor choice of name actually. Um,
so the question was, having had those
four extra planets and then downrated
them, what were we going to do with all
these small objects in the outer solar
system?
And it was realized that there was no
definition of the word planet that had
any real scientific basis. So, the
International Astronomical Union decided
they better make one up and they came up
with a definition of a planet versus a
dwarf planet and they made it such that
Pluto, Ays, and the other objects
including series were all classified as
dwarf planets. Now, in my book, a dwarf
planet is still a planet, just a dwarf
version. Um, and I don't have a problem
with this.
I do have a problem with the definition
though because they required that the
planet had pulled itself to be in
hydrostatic equilibrium. In other words,
that gravity had overcome the strength
and stresses in the object and pulled it
into a spherical shape or at least close
to a spherical shape. But you can see
huame is the shape of an American
football or a rugby ball um wildly
rotating and the centrifugal force has
made it extremely elongated. It's not
really a sphere. So that definition
again is a bit suspect. And then of
course there are objects like Vesta
which are very nearly round but have a
big crater on them. Um, and there are
lots of things that are wrong with the
the idea that you have to be round
because how round is round. And then we
have the uh other clause which is that
you must have cleared your orbit. And I
think that was put in there so that
Pluto did not get planetary status
because of all these other objects in
similar orbits in the Kiper belt. And
likewise, series would not count as a
planet because of the other asteroids.
But that's very dubious as well because
there are bodies that share their orbit
either directly in a one-year orbit with
the Earth or WI with the Trojan
asteroids of the outer planets like
Jupiter and Neptune. Uh you know, those
those haven't cleared their orbits
either. So really it was a botch I think
and uh they should have done better. No
wonder people still argue about it
today.
Now Eris had a
moon, a large moon called Disnomia, the
Greek goddess of lawlessness, Eris's
daughter. So that made sense for the
daughter of the goddess of strife to be
the goddess of lawlessness. Very good
choice of name. It's quite big. 615
kilometers in diameter. So bigger than
Vesta, smaller than series. About a
quarter the diameter of Aerys. And
that's quite a big ratio between the
size of the primary and its moon. And it
orbits round in just under 16 days at
37,000 kilometers from Aris at a
tremendous tilt 78° compared to the
plane of the ecliptic. So
with that we can do some maths. I know
you like it when I do some maths. So
we're going to do some again now. We can
work out the mass of AIS because we have
dysomia orbiting around AIS and we know
the distance and we know how long it
takes to go around. We can calculate the
mass and find that it's 127% that of
Pluto. And here we go. Actually, it's
very easy. We know the Earth moon system
has a 27day rotation and a distance on
average of 384,000
km and with Eris and dysomia it's just
under 16 days and under 38,000 km. So
let's do it in uh a very rough
engineering approximation.
15.8 8 out of 27 is pretty much 60% of
the period and you can see that the
ratio of distance is nearly 10%.
So we'll use those numbers. And we have
Kepler's third law stated at the top
there that tells us that the ratio of
the time squared is directly related to
the cube of the radius um divided by the
mass with those constants of 4 pi^ 2 and
g thrown in. But we don't need to worry
about calculating all of the hard
numbers. We can just do it using a
ratio. So if we plug in 6 and 0.1 for
the time and the radius we get 6^
squared
which is 36 on the left and on the right
we're going to get 0.1 cubed which is 1
over a,0001
and if we multiply both sides by a
th00and we get rid of that and we get
is the ratio of the masses in the
system. I have cunningly divided the uh
the equations out so that I can just use
the ratio of the mass there and not
worry about it. So it tells us that the
uh earth must be 360 times as massive as
er. So we take the mass of the earth 6 *
10 24 kg divided by 360 we get 1.67
* 10 22. I did it with my calculator and
yay, that's the same as the accepted
answer. So despite my slightly gross
approximations,
um this very simple threeline
calculation gives me the right answer.
Uh I do love it when that happens. And
of course you can do exactly the same
thing with Sharon and Pluto and you can
work out the mass of Pluto the same way
and hence you can know the difference
between the two.
So they are actually very similar. The
surface
is a little bit whiter than that of
Pluto or indeed the moon of Neptune
Triton and that means it's a bit
shinier. Um, there's more fresh methane
on the surface burying the tholins, the
strange carbon, nitrogen, oxygen
compounds that seem to get created on
the surface of these outer solar system
bodies by exposure to the solar wind
causing uh quirky chemical reactions by
activating the molecules by hitting them
with high energy particles. that seems
to allow rather curious and strange
chemical reactions to build complex
organo nitrogen molecules which we just
call tholins. It's very difficult to
know what they are because there's a
whole mixture of them and so the
spectrum of the light is very
complicated indeed.
What we could really do is getting a
sample and that's another story. So
something is refreshing the surface.
There is something causing methane to
come to the surface and
cover over the darkening. This seems to
be the best explanation for it. It's
pretty cold. Depends on the uh the uh
season and the distance from the sun.
So, it's somewhere between 30 and 60
Kelvin. That's a very low temperature
indeed. It's able to freeze out
nitrogen. It's can freeze out methane
and we get methane ice detected in the
spectrum. And another piece of evidence
here is that the methane shows a lower
than normal amount of the heavy isotope
of hydrogen dutyium.
And that's strange.
It's usually living processes that
manage to discriminate between the
different isotopes of carbon and the
different isotopes of hydrogen when
making molecules because they are
carrying out very subtle chemical
reactions. But something here is
disproportionately
avoiding creating this methane
containing dutyium and that's then
coming to the surface and covering over
the uh folins as we described earlier.
So, something interesting going on down
in the interior.
And we think the interior is warm,
heated by radioactive decay and possibly
also from a contribution from the moon
dysomia orbiting around it creating
tidal effects.
And that could just be bringing it up to
the point where there's a liquid water
ocean at the mantle core boundary. And
that's likely to be the same situation
on several of these outer solar system
objects. AIS, Pluto, and Triton are all
candidates for a subsurface
under the ice liquid water ocean. And to
see that Pluto and Triton um we will
talk about in other videos, but to see
the methane situation with EIS is very
very intriguing as regards some sort of
interesting chemistry, even a biosphere
living beneath uh on Aerys. Wouldn't
that be amazing?
So, the only probe that's gone out this
far recently has been New Horizons. And
it flew past Pluto 10 years ago now in
2015, took some amazing photographs, but
it couldn't slow down and go into orbit.
It just had to keep on going. And after
it had gone by, 5 years afterwards, it
had transmitted all its data back uh
slowly uh over the radio link back to
Earth. In 2020, in May, it turned its
attention to Eris. Now, it wasn't what
you might call close. It was still 112
astronomical units from AIS,
but it was at the time
96 astronomical units from the Earth. So
it was very much looking on a triangular
uh viewpoint
across the solar system from within the
Kiper belt to AIS. And this gave it an
interesting angle which allowed it to
see Aris
from the point of view of how it was
scattering light and how the phase angle
and the phase that uh we would be
observing because we'd partially be
seeing the dark side in the uh direction
of the spacecraft and that could give us
quite a lot of useful information. Um
it's not fantastic. it could to do with
being much much closer. And so since
2010, various ideas have been put around
to send missions out to EIS and other
Kiper belt objects. Now, whatever we
launch is going to take about 25 years
to get there, even if we do a flyby of
things like Jupiter and Venus to pick up
as much speed as possible and head out
to the outer solar system. So the
trajectory marked on there is actually
the trajectory that um was taken by New
Horizons past Pluto and then past what's
labeled as PT1 potential target one now
called Araoth. Um and you can see that
EIS is way over the other side of the
solar system right at the top of the
diagram there.
And so finally, I just want to leave you
with this little quirk, which is that
the name erys comes from the Greek stem
erid. And the adjective Eidian would
apply to any life that we found on Eris.
And actually, that's the same name that
was chosen for Rocky, the five-legged
alien in Project Hail Mary by Andy Weir,
who also wrote The Martian. And it's a
fantastic read. So, this is my plug for
going and reading Project Hail Mary if
you haven't. It was uh one of the best
science fiction stories I've read for a
very long time. Um now in that book not
to give away too many spoilers the uh
origin was not Eris in the outer solar
system but the epsilon Eerodani system
out uh a star system a dozen light years
from the sun and I've done a talk about
epsylon erodani and I give Andy wear a
plug in there as well because it really
was such a good book. So that was once
around Eris and thanks very much for
listening and do enjoy some of my other
videos uh that are in the catalog.